Roadmap content (#9241)
ethereum/ethereum-org-website: src/content/roadmap/single-slot-finality/index.md

## What is the role of the fork-choice rule in SSF? {#role-of-the-fork-choice-rule}

Today's consensus mechanism relies on a tight coupling between the finality gadget (the algorithm that determines whether 2/3 of validators have attested to a certain chain) and the fork choice rule (the algorithm that decides which chain is the correct one when there are multiple options). The fork choice algorithm only considers blocks _since_ the last finalized block. Under SSF there wouldn't be any blocks for the fork choice rule to consider, because finality occurs in the same slot as the block is proposed. This means that under SSF _either_ the fork choice algorithm _or_ the finality gadget would be active at any time. The finality gadget would finalize blocks where 2/3 of validators were online and attesting honestly. If a block is not able to exceed the 2/3 threshold, the fork choice rule would kick in to determine which chain to follow. This also creates an opportunity to maintain the inactivity leak mechanism that recovers a chain where >1/3 validators go offline, albeit with some additional nuances.

## Outstanding issues {#outstanding-issues}

> The problem with scaling aggregation by growing the number of validators per subnet is that it leads to greater load on the peer-to-peer network. The problem with adding layers of aggregations is that it is quite complex to engineer and adds latency (i.e. it could take longer for the block propsoer to hear from al the subnet aggregators). It is also not clear how to deal with the scenario that there are more active validators on the network than can feasibly be processed in each slot, even with BLS signature aggregation. One potential solution is that, because all validators attest in every slot and there are no committees under SSF, the 32 ETH cap on the effective balance could be removed entirely, meaning operators managing multiple validators could consolidate their stake and run fewer, reducing the number of messages that validating nodes have to process to account for the entire validator set. This relies on large stakers agreeing to consolidate their validators. It is also possible to impose a fixed cap on the number of validators or the amount of staked ETH at any time. However, this requires some mechanism for decided which validators are allowed to participate and which are not, which is liable to create unwanted secondary effects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The problem with scaling aggregation by growing the number of validators per subnet is that it leads to greater load on the peer-to-peer network. The problem with adding layers of aggregations is that it is quite complex to engineer and adds latency (i.e. it could take longer for the block proposer to hear from all the subnet aggregators). It is also not clear how to deal with the scenario that there are more active validators on the network than can feasibly be processed in each slot, even with BLS signature aggregation. One potential solution is that, because all validators attest in every slot and there are no committees under SSF, the 32 ETH cap on the effective balance could be removed entirely, meaning operators managing multiple validators could consolidate their stake and run fewer, reducing the number of messages that validating nodes have to process to account for the entire validator set. This relies on large stakers agreeing to consolidate their validators. It is also possible to impose a fixed cap on the number of validators or the amount of staked ETH at any time. However, this requires some mechanism for deciding which validators are allowed to participate and which are not, which is liable to create unwanted secondary effects.
```

## When will SSF ship? {#when-will-ssf-ship}

SSF is still in the research phase and is not expected to ship for several years, likely after other substantial upgrades such as Verkle trees and Danksharding.

## Further Reading {#further-reading}

- [Watch Vitalik on SSF at EDCON 2022](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPgUKNPWXNI)
- [Vitalik's notes: Paths to single slot finality](https://notes.ethereum.org/@vbuterin/single_slot_finality#What-might-the-exact-consensus-algorithm-look-like)

> -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: Single slot finality
description: Explanation of single slot finality
lang: en

> summaryPoints:
>   - Single slot finality means that transactions become irreversible almost instantly
>   - Near-instant finality means users and apps can be immediately sure of the permanence of their transactions.
>   - Several types of attack rely upon the ability to reorganize blocks - single slot finality eliminates them.

Reviewer 2: Not used

```suggestion
```

> summaryPoints:
>   - Single slot finality means that transactions become irreversible almost instantly
>   - Near-instant finality means users and apps can be immediately sure of the permanence of their transactions.
>   - Several types of attack rely upon the ability to reorganize blocks - single slot finality eliminates them.

Reviewer 2: Not used

```suggestion
```

---

# Single slot finality {#single-slot-finality}

> Today it takes about 15 minutes for an Ethereum block to finalize. However, there are several improvements that can be made to the consensus mechanism that will make validating blocks much more efficient and allow the time-to-finality to decrease dramatically. Instead of waiting for fifteen minutes, blocks could be finalized in the same slot in which it is proposed. This is known as **single slot finality (SSF)**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It takes about 15 minutes for an Ethereum block to finalize. However, we can make Ethereum's consensus mechanism validate blocks more efficiently and decrease time-to-finality dramatically. Instead of waiting for fifteen minutes, blocks could get proposed and finalized in the same slot. This concept is known as **single slot finality (SSF)**.
```

Ethereum's current consensus mechanism balanced these three parameters by:

- **Setting the minimum stake to 32 ETH**. This sets an upper limit on the number of validators' attestations that have to be processed by individual nodes, and therefore an upper limit on computational requirements for each node.
- **Setting the time to finality at ~15 minutes**. This gives sufficient time for validators run on normal home computers to safely process attestations for each block.

With the current mechanism design, in order to reduce the time to finality, it is necessary to reduce the number of validators on the network or increase the hardware requirements for each node. However, there are improvements that can be made to the way attestations are processed that can allow more attestations to be counted without adding to the overhead at each node. The more efficient processing will allow finality to be determined within a single slot, rather than across two epochs.

## Routes to SSF {#routes-to-ssf}

> <ExpandableCard title= "Why can't we have SSF today?" eventCategory="/roadmap/single-slot-finality" eventName="clicked Why can't we hear SSF today?">

Reviewer 2: (not blocking)

## Current progress {#current-progress}

> SSF is still in the research phase and is not expected to ship for several years, likely after other substantial upgrades such as Verkle trees and Danksharding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SSF is in the research phase. It is not expected to ship for several years, likely after other substantial upgrades such as [Verkle trees](/roadmap/verkle-trees/) and [Danksharding](/roadmap/danksharding]).
```

> ## Further Reading {#further-reading}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Further reading {#further-reading}
```
